[WIP] adding Kandinsky training scripts (#4890)
huggingface/diffusers: examples/kandinsky2_2/text_to_image/README.md

# Kandinsky2.2 text-to-image fine-tuning

> Kandinsky 2.2 includes a prior pipeline that generates image embeddings from text prompts, and a decoder pipeline to that generate the output image based on the image embeddings. We provide `train_text_to_image_prior.py` and `train_text_to_image_decoder.py` scripts to show you how to fine-tune the kandinsky prior and decoder models seperately based on your own dataset. To achieve the best resutls, you should fine-tune both your prior and decoder models.

Reviewer: Let's leave a link to the Kandinsky paper or the official repo or something that was officially released by the authors?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kandinsky 2.2 includes a prior pipeline that generates image embeddings from text prompts, and a decoder pipeline that generates the output image based on the image embeddings. We provide `train_text_to_image_prior.py` and `train_text_to_image_decoder.py` scripts to show you how to fine-tune the Kandinsky prior and decoder models separately based on your own dataset. To achieve the best results, you should fine-tune **_both_** your prior and decoder models.
```

Let's maintain "Kandinsky" throughout.

Run the following command to authenticate your token

```bash
huggingface-cli login
```

We also use [Weights and Biases](https://docs.wandb.ai/quickstart) logging by default, because it is really useful to monitor the training progress by regularly generating sample images during training. To install wandb, run 

```bash
pip install wandb
```

To diable wandb logging, remove the `--report_to=="wandb"` and `--validation_prompts="A robot pokemon, 4k photo"` flags from below examples

#### Fine-tune decoder
<br>

<!-- accelerate_snippet_start -->
```bash
export DATASET_NAME="lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions"

accelerate launch --mixed_precision="fp16"  train_text_to_image_decoder.py \
  --dataset_name=$DATASET_NAME \
  --resolution=768 \
  --train_batch_size=1 \
  --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
  --gradient_checkpointing \
  --max_train_steps=15000 \
  --learning_rate=1e-05 \
  --max_grad_norm=1 \
  --checkpoints_total_limit=3 \
  --lr_scheduler="constant" --lr_warmup_steps=0 \
  --validation_prompts="A robot pokemon, 4k photo" \
  --report_to="wandb" \
  --push_to_hub \
  --output_dir="kandi2-decoder-pokemon-model" 
```
<!-- accelerate_snippet_end -->

> To run on your own training files prepare the dataset according to the format required by `datasets`, you can find the instructions for how to do that in this [document](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.4.0/en/image_load#imagefolder-with-metadata).
> If you wish to use custom loading logic, you should modify the script, we have left pointers for that in the training script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To train on your own training files, prepare the dataset according to the format required by `datasets`. You can find the instructions for how to do that in the [ImageFolder with metadata](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/image_load#imagefolder-with-metadata) guide.
If you wish to use custom loading logic, you should modify the script and we have left pointers for that in the training script.
```

  --push_to_hub \
  --output_dir="kandi22-decoder-pokemon-model" 
```

Once the training is finished the model will be saved in the `output_dir` specified in the command. In this example it's `kandi22-decoder-pokemon-model`. To load the fine-tuned model for inference just pass that path to `AutoPipelineForText2Image`

```python
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
import torch

pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained(output_dir, torch_dtype=torch.float16)
pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()

prompt='A robot pokemon, 4k photo'
images = pipe(prompt=prompt).images
images[0].save("robot-pokemon.png")
```

Checkpoints only save the unet, so to run inference from a checkpoint, just load the unet
```python
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image, UNet2DConditionModel

model_path = "path_to_saved_model"

unet = UNet2DConditionModel.from_pretrained(model_path + "/checkpoint-<N>/unet")

pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder", unet=unet, torch_dtype=torch.float16)
pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()

image = pipe(prompt="A robot pokemon, 4k photo").images[0]
image.save("robot-pokemon.png")
```

#### Fine-tune prior 

> You can fine-tune kandinsky prior model with `train_text_to_image_prior.py` script. Note that we currently do not support `--gradient_checkpointing` for prior model fine-tune.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can fine-tune the Kandinsky prior model with `train_text_to_image_prior.py` script. Note that we currently do not support `--gradient_checkpointing` for prior model fine-tuning.
```

<br>

<!-- accelerate_snippet_start -->
```bash
export DATASET_NAME="lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions"

accelerate launch --mixed_precision="fp16"  train_text_to_image_prior.py \
  --dataset_name=$DATASET_NAME \
  --resolution=768 \
  --train_batch_size=1 \
  --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
  --max_train_steps=15000 \
  --learning_rate=1e-05 \
  --max_grad_norm=1 \
  --checkpoints_total_limit=3 \
  --lr_scheduler="constant" --lr_warmup_steps=0 \
  --validation_prompts="A robot pokemon, 4k photo" \
  --report_to="wandb" \
  --push_to_hub \
  --output_dir="kandi2-prior-pokemon-model" 
```
<!-- accelerate_snippet_end -->

> To perform inference with the fune-tuned prior model, you will need to first create a prior pipeline by passing the `output_dir` to `DiffusionPpeline`, and then you can create a `KandinskyV22CombinedPipeline` with a pretrained or fine-tuned decoder checkpoint, along with all the modules of the prior pipeline you just created. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To perform inference with the fine-tuned prior model, you will need to first create a prior pipeline by passing the `output_dir` to `DiffusionPipeline`. Then create a `KandinskyV22CombinedPipeline` from a pretrained or fine-tuned decoder checkpoint along with all the modules of the prior pipeline you just created. 
```

```python
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image, DiffusionPipeline
import torch

pipe_prior = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(output_dir, torch_dtype=torch.float16)
prior_components = {"prior_" + k: v for k,v in pipe_prior.components.items()}
pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder", **prior_components, torch_dtype=torch.float16)

pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()
prompt='A robot pokemon, 4k photo'
images = pipe(prompt=prompt, negative_prompt=negative_prompt).images
images[0]

> ```

Reviewer: Can we also make a note on how to perform inference when someone fine-tunes both the prior and the decoder? Of course, it's obvious to us as to what needs to be done but it might not be for all.

#### Training with multiple GPUs

`accelerate` allows for seamless multi-GPU training. Follow the instructions [here](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/basic_tutorials/launch)
for running distributed training with `accelerate`. Here is an example command:

```bash
export DATASET_NAME="lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions"

accelerate launch --mixed_precision="fp16" --multi_gpu  train_text_to_image_decoder.py \
  --dataset_name=$DATASET_NAME \
  --resolution=768 \
  --train_batch_size=1 \
  --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
  --gradient_checkpointing \
  --max_train_steps=15000 \
  --learning_rate=1e-05 \
  --max_grad_norm=1 \
  --checkpoints_total_limit=3 \
  --lr_scheduler="constant" --lr_warmup_steps=0 \
  --validation_prompts="A robot pokemon, 4k photo" \
  --report_to="wandb" \
  --push_to_hub \
  --output_dir="kandi2-decoder-pokemon-model" 
```

#### Training with Min-SNR weighting

> We support training with the Min-SNR weighting strategy proposed in [Efficient Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09556) which helps to achieve faster convergence
> by rebalancing the loss. In order to use it, one needs to set the `--snr_gamma` argument. The recommended
> value when using it is 5.0. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We support training with the Min-SNR weighting strategy proposed in [Efficient Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09556) which helps achieve faster convergence
by rebalancing the loss. Enable the `--snr_gamma` argument and set it to the recommended
value of 5.0.
```

## Training with LoRA

Low-Rank Adaption of Large Language Models was first introduced by Microsoft in [LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685) by *Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen*.

In a nutshell, LoRA allows adapting pretrained models by adding pairs of rank-decomposition matrices to existing weights and **only** training those newly added weights. This has a couple of advantages:

- Previous pretrained weights are kept frozen so that model is not prone to [catastrophic forgetting](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1611835114).
- Rank-decomposition matrices have significantly fewer parameters than original model, which means that trained LoRA weights are easily portable.
- LoRA attention layers allow to control to which extent the model is adapted toward new training images via a `scale` parameter.

[cloneofsimo](https://github.com/cloneofsimo) was the first to try out LoRA training for Stable Diffusion in the popular [lora](https://github.com/cloneofsimo/lora) GitHub repository.

> With LoRA, it's possible to fine-tune Kandinsky2.2 on a custom image-caption pair dataset

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With LoRA, it's possible to fine-tune Kandinsky 2.2 on a custom image-caption pair dataset
```

on consumer GPUs like Tesla T4, Tesla V100.

### Training

> First, you need to set up your development environment as is explained in the [installation section](#installing-the-dependencies). Make sure to set the `MODEL_NAME` and `DATASET_NAME` environment variables. Here, we will use [Kandinsky2.2](https://huggingface.co/kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder) and the [Pokemons dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you need to set up your development environment as explained in the [installation](#installing-the-dependencies). Make sure to set the `MODEL_NAME` and `DATASET_NAME` environment variables. Here, we will use [Kandinsky 2.2](https://huggingface.co/kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder) and the [Pokemons dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions).  
```

  --num_train_epochs=100 --checkpointing_steps=5000 \
  --learning_rate=1e-04 --lr_scheduler="constant" --lr_warmup_steps=0 \
  --seed=42 \
  --rank=4 \
  --gradient_checkpointing \
  --output_dir="kandi22-decoder-pokemon-lora" \
  --validation_prompt="cute dragon creature" --report_to="wandb" \
  --push_to_hub \
```

#### Train prior

```bash
export DATASET_NAME="lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions"

accelerate launch --mixed_precision="fp16" train_text_to_image_prior_lora.py \
  --dataset_name=$DATASET_NAME --caption_column="text" \
  --resolution=768 \
  --train_batch_size=1 \
  --num_train_epochs=100 --checkpointing_steps=5000 \
  --learning_rate=1e-04 --lr_scheduler="constant" --lr_warmup_steps=0 \
  --seed=42 \
  --rank=4 \
  --output_dir="kandi22-prior-pokemon-lora" \
  --validation_prompt="cute dragon creature" --report_to="wandb" \
  --push_to_hub \
```

**___Note: When using LoRA we can use a much higher learning rate compared to non-LoRA fine-tuning. Here we use *1e-4* instead of the usual *1e-5*. Also, by using LoRA, it's possible to run above scripts in consumer GPUs like T4 or V100.___**

### Inference

#### Inference using fine-tuned LoRA checkpoint for decoder

> Once you have trained a kandinsky decoder model using above command, the inference can be done simply using the `AutoPipelineForText2Image` after loading the trained LoRA weights.  You need to pass the `output_dir` for loading the LoRA weights which, in this case, is `kandi22-decoder-pokemon-lora`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have trained a Kandinsky decoder model using the above command, inference can be done with the `AutoPipelineForText2Image` after loading the trained LoRA weights.  You need to pass the `output_dir` for loading the LoRA weights, which in this case is `kandi22-decoder-pokemon-lora`.
```

```python
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
import torch

pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
pipe.unet.load_attn_procs(output_dir)
pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()

prompt='A robot pokemon, 4k photo'
image = pipe(prompt=prompt).images[0]
image.save("robot_pokemon.png")
```

> #### Inference using fine-tuned LoRA checkpoint for Prior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Inference using fine-tuned LoRA checkpoint for prior
```

```python
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
import torch

> pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder", torch_dtype=torch.float16)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pipe = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-prior", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
```

Author: Actually, here we want to create a combined pipeline, so will have to use the decoder checkpoint for that
once we have the `pipe` as the combined pipeline, we then access the prior with `pipe.prior_prior`

pipe.prior_prior.load_attn_procs(output_dir)
pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()

prompt='A robot pokemon, 4k photo'
image = pipe(prompt=prompt).images[0]
image.save("robot_pokemon.png")
image
```

### Training with xFormers:

You can enable memory efficient attention by [installing xFormers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/xformers) and passing the `--enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention` argument to the script.

> xFormers training is not available for Prior model fine-tune.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
xFormers training is not available for fine-tuning the prior model.
```

**Note**:

> According to [this issue](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/issues/2234#issuecomment-1416931212), xFormers `v0.0.16` cannot be used for training in some GPUs. If you observe that problem, please install a development version as indicated in that comment.

Reviewer: We have LoRA too. Let's include a section on LoRA as well in the README.
